MEMORY
Module 25: Storage & Retrieval
Patient HM's brain Missing hippocampal areas in (a) and (b)

Information processing model of memory

Duration Capacity
Content

Sensory memory

Working/ST memory Long-term memory store

Milliseconds or seconds

20-30 sec unless rehearsed

Years

Large

A few "chunks"

Very large

Small buffer that holds sensory info just a bit longer than the stimulus

Active mental workspace for incoming info from sensory
memory and older info retrieved from LTM

Relatively permanent and limitless archive of knowledge,
skills, experiences

First, word rating demo

Memory Encoding

Levels of processing: how we initially encode the information matters a lot!

(matters even more than intending to remember)

"Deeper" processing = focusing more on meaning/semantics

Shallow

Deep

What is the fate of info as it is processed in the memory model? One hint: the serial position curve

100

# students with correct recall

90

80

70 60 Primacy Effect
(long-term 50 memory) 40

Recency Effect (working memory)

30

20

10

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

Serial Position

Delayed test or immediate counting task: only primacy effect

Memory Storage

Memory Storage
Consolidation while we sleep À Hippocampus holds the event file À Then transfers it to the cortex for storage
International society for the experimental study of cognition. Since it was formed over 60 years ago, the Society has grown to over 4,300 cognitive psychologists.

These can co-occur

Memory Storage

We can use these implicit memories without being able to articulate them

All kinds of memory, particularly emotional

+ priming Activation of associations in memory (typically, unconscious and implicit)

Memory Storage

The amygdala boosts memory processing during emotional or stressful times Flashbulb memories: a vivid memory of an emotionally significant moment or event We *think* they stay highly accurate... but they are subject to forgetting just like any other memory

How do we know that memory storage has different subcomponents?
Case studies show selective deficits of one type of memory and not another
HM and Clive Wearing both had hippocampal damage, severe anterograde amnesia
À Had trouble transferring WM  LTM À Could do a working memory task almost normally, but would not remember he
had done it after a break À Implicit memory seemed intact

https://youtu.be/c62C_yTUyVg

Severe anterograde amnesia patients can still have relatively intact procedural learning

Memory Retrieval
Encoding specificity principle
The more closely the retrieval cues match encoding cues, the better the information will be remembered

Endel Tulving

Memory Retrieval
À Context-dependent memory À State-dependent memory

Context-dependent retrieval includes the external environment as well as our internal environment (statedependent; mood-congruent memory)

Human memory is not like a video recorder Information undergoes systematic changes as it is processed We reconstruct the past ¡ it is more like an artist's rendering than a
faithful objective representation

Forgetting sucks. But might it be adaptive?
"It can be very hard to forget embarrassing moments. You feel the same emotions ¡ it is just as raw, just as fresh... You can't turn off that stream of memories, no matter how hard you try."
"It is like having these open wounds ¡ they are just a part of you."

Information processing model of memory

Some info is lost

Some info is lost

Forgetting is adaptive!

If it makes it here, it may not be lost ¡ but inaccessible without
the proper cue

Next class: forgetting and remembering

