MEMORY
Module 24

Polleverywhere.com/ecs

Where we've come from...learning
Where we're heading now...memory
· Memory is learning that persists over time (encoding, storage, retrieval) · Today: encoding of memories

Measuring memory
· Recall · Recognition · Relearning

Ebbinghaus's relearning results:

Information-processing model of memory
Sensory memory Working/ST memory Long-term memory store
Duration Capacity Content

· Sensory memory: the immediate, very brief recording of sensory information in the memory system
· Persistence following transduction

Sperling's whole report

· Conclusion: capacity is about 4.5 items
· But participants reported seeing more!
· Alternative explanation: all letters were perceived, but forgetting was too fast; it decayed while reporting

Sperling's whole & partial report

· With the partial report and immediate tone cue, participants remembered

· 100% of a 3 x 3 array · 75% of a 3 x 4 array
· So, which is right?

Capacity is about 4.5 items

Capacity is greater than 4.5 but forgetting happened while reporting the numbers

Duration Capacity Content

Sensory memory
Milliseconds or seconds
Large Buffer that holds sensory info
just a bit longer than the stimulus

· "The two-track mind" (conscious and unconscious parallel processing of info)
· Selective attention: we consciously attend to and process a very limited portion of incoming information
· Unconscious processing: much of the info can also be processed outside our awareness

The initial concept of short-term memory...
· Miller, 1956: "Magical number 7±2" · Buffer/holding place for info from sensory memory
Find your simple short-term memory span! I will read you numbers. After a short delay, I will tell you recall,
write down the sequence I told you.
Find your complex working memory span! Write down T/F to indicate whether the following equations are
true or false. ALSO: remember the second number in each equation When you see "recall" write down the whole string of numbers

Score yourself:
Did the two types of tasks feel different? Was your performance different on them? What do you think characterizes working memory (versus
short-term memory)?

The newer idea: WORKING MEMORY

Simple span task: storage

SHORT-TERM MEMORY

Complex span task: storage + manipulation

WORKING MEMORY

· Working memory: a newer understanding of short-term memory; conscious, active processing of both (1) incoming sensory information and (2) information retrieved from long-term memory.

What is the duration of STM/WM?
· Without rehearsal, the info is quite transient (< 30s)

What is the capacity of STM/WM?
· Miller, 1956: "Magical number 7±2 items" · What is an item?
· A "CHUNK"
monkey child wildly zoo jumped city ringtail young
And how many *chunks* can we keep in STM/WM? Maybe fewer than 7±2...just a few, or one?

Chunking in chess

How many chess pieces could you remember on a board? Might depend on your proficiency level...

Chunking in chess
Master Advanced Beginner

Chase & Simon (1973)

Advanced

Beginner

Master

Chunking might be nearly unlimited...memory competitors!
12.74 seconds, Shijir-Erdene Bat-Enkh iam-memory.org; https://youtu.be/OApSOU7NIAw

Chunking (+ mnemonics) might be nearly unlimited...
· Based on the method of loci · Mentally place objects along a path you're familiar with
· E.g., your body, your home · Picture the pathway from the front door to your bedroom

· Scaling this up for memory competitors...
· PAO: Person ­ Action ­ Object: In this system every two-digit number from 00 to 99 is processed into a single image of a person performing an action on an object
· 14: Taylor Swift ­ singing ­ microphone · 15: Lionel Messi ­ kicking ­ soccer ball · 92: Superman ­ flying ­ cape

· 6 digits of pi: 3.14159265359

HOLY CHUNKING!

· Turn this into a single image, place it in the first place of your memory palace

Duration Capacity
Content

Sensory memory

Working/ST memory Long-term memory store

Milliseconds or seconds

20-30 sec unless rehearsed

Years

Large

A few "chunks"

Very large

Small buffer that holds sensory info just a bit longer than the stimulus

Active mental workspace for incoming info from sensory
memory and older info retrieved from LTM

Relatively permanent and limitless archive of knowledge,
skills, experiences

What makes it into long-term memory?

· Relatively permanent and probably limitless archive of the memory system; includes knowledge, skills, experiences
Own cues Another
person's cues Guess target,
using cues

Bahrick, Bahrick, & Witlinger (1975)

Duration Capacity
Content

Sensory memory

Working/ST memory Long-term memory store

Milliseconds or seconds

20-30 sec unless rehearsed

Years

Large

A few "chunks"

Very large

Small buffer that holds sensory info just a bit longer than the stimulus

Active mental workspace for incoming info from sensory
memory and older info retrieved from LTM

Relatively permanent and limitless archive of knowledge,
skills, experiences

