INTRO PSYCH
CONSCIOUSNESS & ATTENTION MODULE 8

Course reminders
À iclicker
À You have 3 drops (that includes emergencies, sports travel, religious accommodations) À You have to answer all Qs, or all Qs but 1 À Sometimes you need to hit "submit" on the Q À Any issues, come up and tell us after (must verify you were here in person; no emails)
À Exam
À Give us a week to post grades À We will explain procedures to come see your exam
À Office hours
À Drop by/zoom in anytime, no appointments necessary À Use link from canvas
À Other questions?
À Discussion board

Plan for today
À Definitions of consciousness, disorders of consciousness
À Conscious awareness in regular, daily life
À Selective attention, multi-tasking, inattentional blindness

Altered States of Consciousness
Consciousness = our subjective awareness of ourselves and our environment

Disordered states of consciousness

Clinical Case: Terri Schiavo Persistent Vegetative State

Disordered states of consciousness

Clinical Case: Jan Grzebski Minimally Conscious State
Some awareness in coma, some transition to and from normal consciousness/deep coma

But are we accurate at making this clinical distinction?
Evidence of Awareness? When asked to imagine playing tennis or navigating her home, a vegetative patient's brain (top) exhibited activity similar to a healthy person's brain (bottom).

Clinical Case: Jean-Dominique Bauby Locked-in-syndrome
"Normal" consciousness with minimal ability to show it

Disordered states of consciousness
~not a disorder of consciousness

Disorder of visual consciousness: Blindsight
À Damage to primary visual cortex
À Perception without consciousness
À Attribution of "seeinglike actions" to "feelings"
https://youtu.be/ACkxe_5Ubq8

Disorder of visual consciousness: Unilateral neglect
À Unilateral neglect: typically, injury to right parietal lobe À Impairment attending to left side of space À (Left side of space not available for conscious awareness ¡ not a vision issue)
https://youtu.be/d4FhZs-m7hA interesting video of clinical testing

Reading task

German artist, Anton Raederscheidt
Self-portraits during recovery from severe stroke

À Unconscious Processing
À Processing many aspects of a problem simultaneously; the brain's natural mode of information processing for many functions
À Conscious Processing
À Focusing conscious awareness on one particular stimulus (or a few stimuli)

Now: Basic concepts in normal consciousness
À Selective attention À Multi-tasking (or lack thereof!) À Inattentional blindness À Change blindness

Everyone knows what attention is. It is the taking possession by the mind, in clear and vivid form, of one out of what seem several simultaneously possible objects or trains of thought. It implies withdrawal of some things in order to deal effectively with others."

- William James

Selective attention: Focusing conscious awareness on a particular stimuli
À We selectively attend to, and process, a very limited portion of incoming information À What happens to everything else?

Evidence suggests we have a "two-track mind" À Conscious vs. unconscious "dual processing" À Things happen outside of our awareness

Dual processing helps us avoid having thousands of things coming to our conscious awareness all of the time!

What things capture our attention?
À Exogenous attention: external things capture your attention
À Phone notification, something flying towards your head, lights flickering, jump scares
À Endogenous attention: you control your attention
À Focusing on studying, paying attention to the slides, trying to shut out distracting noises

Multi-tasking
À Multitasking is when one engages with two tasks or streams of information during the same time period

À We are bad at multi-tasking, we are bad at knowing we are bad at multi-tasking
À Frequent multitaskers actually multitask less well than those who are infrequent multitaskers

À Unless one task is highly automatized, we are probably just task-switching

Jeong and Hwang (2016)

Multi-tasking shows worse cognitive outcomes than single task

Multi-tasking (or lack thereof!)
À Final exam score & nonacademic internet use during class: r = ¡.25* (Ravizza et al., 2017)
À This relationship was true for those with high and low ACT scores À In 100 mins of class time, median time on other sites was 37 mins
À Multitasking has negative effects on other students - even though students report they are not distracted!
(Sana et al., 2013)

À But...supertaskers! À 2.5% of their sample
Driving simulator + OSPAN working memory task

Inattentional blindness
À Failing to see visible objects when our attention is directed elsewhere

Inattentional blindness in the real world
The fight first became visible to the Ps about 20 seconds into their run, and it remained visible for at least 30 seconds.
56% of Ps noticed the fight

Inattentional blindness in the real world

Change blindness
À (one type of inattentional blindness) À Failure to notice things changing

https://youtu.be/LRFMuGBP15U

Interim summary of consciousness & attention
À Attention  Vision À We have a two-track mind which processes many things without our conscious
awareness (and this is adaptive!) À We do not multitask well À We may be functionally blind to non-attended info

